---
layout:     paper
permalink:  /hell/
---

# Hell #

In order to understand why God would allow people to go to hell, we need to begin a long way off and answer some fundamental questions about the world.  Only then will we be in a position to ask the hell question.  People like to dive in and grapple with the tough questions without first pouring an intellectual foundation and building the base brick by brick.  This is like trying to put a roof on a non-existent house.


## The Possibility of Relationship ##

A fairly standard theodicy goes like this: freedom is necessary for love, and freedom requires the very real possibility of going wrong.  Thus, if God wants to create creatures that love, he necessarily must allow those creatures the very real possibility of going wrong.  I think this line of thought is basically right, but I wish to expand on it a little here.  Not just *love* is impossible without freedom, rather *any* kind of relationship is impossible without freedom---and freedom of a particular sort.

By 'relationship' I do not mean the same thing that logicians mean by 'relation.'  A predicate is a relation when it takes two or more compliments.  Thus, *on top of* is a relation because it always takes two compliments: $X$ is *on top of* $Y$.  By contrast, *red* is not a relation because it only takes one compliment: $X$ is *red*.  Similarly, a relationship requires two or more, but the two "compliments" in a relationship cannot be any old thing.  Consider, for example, the kind of relationship we call "friendship."  I cannot say, "Andrew is friends with this concrete slab" (except perhaps metaphorically).  The entity on the right side of the relationship is of the wrong sort---concrete slabs don't relate.  But why not?  What does the concrete slab lack that Peter, say, possesses?  Andrew can *address* Peter, and Peter can *respond* to Andrew *out of himself*.  We might imagine Andrew in a crazy or wistful mood speaking to his concrete slab, but we would never understand this as a literal act of address, and no matter how crazy Andrew becomes, the slab will never respond out of itself.

Suppose, however, that we dress the concrete slab up a bit.  What if we gave that slab a fancy computer processor, a shiny screen displaying the image of a face, and some speakers?  Could fancy-slab now enter into a *relationship* with Andrew?  Andrew can now speak to fancy-slab and fancy-slab can make some voice-like noises back---perhaps so cleverly that it deceives even Andrew into thinking that he has a friendship with fancy-slab.  Nevertheless, Andrew's relationship with fancy-slab is merely illusory.  In all the interactions between Andrew and fancy-slab, the sounds and images coming from the slab's side do not proceed from the slab itself---they are not *acts* properly so called, but rather mere preprogrammed events.  We should restrict the terms 'act' and 'agent' so that they apply only to entities capable of this from-itself response.  An event is only an *act* if it proceeds from an *agent*, and only agents can enter into real relationships.

The requirement that the participants in relationships are agents is a necessary but not a sufficient condition.  There are other criteria that an entity must meet before it can enter into a relationship: the ability to conceive of the other participants *as* participants in a relationship, a moral sense, linguistic communication etc.  In order to answer the hell question, however, we need only focus on the criterion of genuine agency.  For someone to be the sort of thing that can enter into *any relationship at all* he must be the origin of its own acts.  Thus, if God wants to be in relationship with a creature, he must give that creature this capacity.  Otherwise, he creates a rock or a star or a bit of water---all creations that are good, but could never be in relationship with him.


## Rejection and Coercion ##

Given that relationships require genuine agents, we can see that *good* relationships must take a certain shape.  Let us suppose that there are two lovers, Marcus and Desdemona.  Marcus loves Desdemona from himself, and Desdemona loves Marcus from herself.  (That is to say, they are agents.)  But all is not well: Marcus, being insecure, constantly worries that Desdemona will someday waiver in her love for him.  Sure she promises and whispers her affection daily, but Marcus is not satisfied.  Further suppose (what we may only be able to suppose in fairy tales) that Marcus buys a magical bubbling green potion.  If he drinks this potion its arcane power will change the very nature of Desdemona.  It will guarantee that she will continue all her outward behavior toward him forever but in such a way that it no longer proceeds from herself.  Supposing such a fantastic thing were really possible, what would follow?  Certainly Desdemona's behavior would no longer be *love* no matter how much Marcus thinks so.  This kind of point is frequently made, but I think another is also frequently missed.  Marcus's action would be *evil* because it would be a *violation* of their relationship.  The relationship itself is grounded in their agency, and Marcus's potion corrupts it by bending some portion of Desdemona's agency to his will.  This kind of bending is *coercion*, and not all coercion requires magical potions.

Consider another example where one party to the relationship does end up rejecting the other.  Mathias is Jonah's father.  Like many seventeen-year-old sons, Jonah chafes under his father's authority, and Mathias deeply desires that Jonah return his fatherly love.  In fact, the intensity of Mathias's desire provokes Jonah's rebellion most of all.  Despite Mathias's efforts, Jonah explodes one day in anger, cursing his father to his face and stomping down the porch steps.  From the road Jonah shouts back to his father, "I hate you and all your desires for me.  From here on out, I'm walking away and never intend to see this dirty house or your face again."

Given the way that we understood relationship in the last section, it is important to see that Jonah and Mathias are still in a kind of relationship---only a negatively defined one.  The relationship is structured by an act of desire proceeding from Mathias toward Jonah and an act of rejection proceeding from Jonah toward Mathias.  We don't have a ready name for such a relationship as we do in the case of friendship or love, but surely this kind of relationship is common enough.  Second, it is important to see that the range of *good* actions available to either person is limited by the kind of relationship they are in.  The right way for a husband to relate to his wife is not the same as a boss to his employee.  Finally, we need to combine these two insights into a third: Mathias now finds himself in a kind of relationship that is partly structured by *Jonah's* rejection---a kind of relationship that is not entirely up to Mathias---and this limits the ways that he can lovingly act.  Said another way, the range of options open to Mathias are not entirely up to him.

Think about, then, the kinds of actions available to the rejected person in such a rejector--rejected relationship.  The rejected person could attempt to force the rejector to change his attitude.  Supposing that it is even possible to carry it out, such a plan would never work because it relies on *coercion*.  Should Mathias coerce Jonah into coming back home, the rejection would remain unhealed.  This is not because of any limitation in Mathias's skill or power in carrying out the coercion.  The plan *must* fail for the simple reason that a coerced return would not be *Jonah's* return, it would not proceed from Jonah himself.  Further, such a plan would never be *right* even if it were possible.  If Mathias removed Jonah's rejection by coercion, he would thereby violate Jonah's agency itself.  This would be evil for the same reason that rape is evil.

The really tough theological question is therefore not, "How can a loving God allow people to go to hell?" but rather "How can a loving God save people from hell *without coercion*?"  God's answer to this is Jesus Christ.


## Community ##

So far, I have focused on the kinds of relationships that have only two participants, but my original definition of relationship left open the possibility of more.  In reality, our relationships rarely look like a pair of isolated lovers.

Think about how we need to expand our considerations of what Mathias ought to do when we bring in the further detail that Mathias has nine other children at home.  If we didn't have a tidy name for the rejector--rejected relationship we certainly do not have one for the total relationship that is constituted by Mathias, his ten children, and their plethora of actions and attitudes toward one another.  Nevertheless, the general principle we cited above---that right action is shaped by kind of relationship---remains true.  Mathias cannot take any old course of action in bringing Jonah home because whatever path he chooses will impact his whole house.

Suppose that Jonah does show up on the front porch again some years later in a drunken stupor.  Mathias greets him at the top of the steps with a mighty embrace and shows Jonah to his old room which has been kept clean and ready all these years.  Mathias is overjoyed at dinner despite Jonah's sullen and nearly incoherent talk, but he awakes in the middle of the night to a sickening churn in his gut.  Walking quietly down the hall in the dark, he gently pushes Jonah's door open to find Jonah stooped over his bed with Thomas, Mathias's nine-year-old son, stretched out on it.  Thomas is unconscious with a cloth over his mouth, and Jonah bends over intently to run a razor blade down Thomas's upper arm repeatedly, being so absorbed that he does not notice Mathias.

Now what would you have Mathias do?  He still desires Jonah with the same intensity after many years, but the way he relates to Jonah now must must be conditioned by his love for Thomas and the other children.

In the same way, I believe that the Father still yearns jealously over the heart of each one he creates---even the devil himself.  Further, I do not think that the Father coerces any into hell, just as he does not coerce any into heaven.  I said earlier that we do not have a ready name for the rejector--rejected relationship, and this is true in our daily lives, but I think that when the rejector is a creature and the rejected is God, the proper name for this kind of relationship is 'hell.'
