---
layout: critic
permalink: /philipfeedback/
author: Philip Vogel
---


# I trowe he were a geldyng or a mare


Chaucer's Pardoner is a curious character. <mark>For centuries, his eccentricities have attracted the attention of scholars and inspired a myriad of opinions</mark><span class="critic comment"> This is a rather cliche "from the beginning of time" opening </span>. For better or for worse, most opinions about the Pardoner and his tale <mark>seem</mark><span class="critic comment">Do they actually begin with him or merely "seem" to?</span> to begin with Kittredge (Halverson 184). Although not the first scholar to attempt to grasp *The Pardoner's Tale*, Kittredge undeniably put his finger on its irregular pulse. He identified "the confession of the Pardoner" as the central issue in the tale (1). Ever since, scholars have grappled with how to reconcile the teller and his tale. Kittredge suggests:

> The Pardoner is an able and eloquent man, a friar, very likely,
> who had entered his order with the best purposes, or, at any
> rate, with no bad aims, and with possibilities of good in him,
> and had grown corrupt with its corruption. His debasement seems
> to be utter, for one must not forget the picture in the general
> prologue. Nothing but a ribald story appears possible from him.
> But, by showing us the man in a moment of moral convulsion,
> Chaucer has invested him with a sort of dignity which justifies
> the poet in putting into his mouth one of the most beautiful as
> well as one of the best told tales in the whole collection. (833)

Kittredge reconciles the teller and his tale with his claim that the thoroughly immoral Pardoner undergoes a "moment of moral convulsion" which is brought about by his own moral tale and which leads to the inconsistencies. Notably, Kittredge relies on a sort of psychoanalysis, turning towards speculations about the inward state of the Pardoner. Much of the criticism of *The Pardoner's Tale* reflects this inward turn. In her perennial article "Eunuch Hermeneutics," Carolyn Dinshaw echoes Kittredge's concern with the Pardoner's inward state. She employs Freudian and Lacanian psychoanalysis to arrive at an interpretation of the Pardoner and his tale that brings together his castration, relics, and language, claiming that the Pardoner displays fetishism (Dinshaw 33, 43). Even in interpretations directly opposed to Kittredge's reading, the inward turn remains. "The Pardoner as Huckster: a Dissent from Kittredge," by Alexander Evanoff, argues that Kittredge "overstated his case" (209). Evanoff finds little evidence to support Kittredge's claim that the Pardoner experiences "moral convulsion," and he instead reads the Pardoner as a thoroughgoing swindler and salesman who is "feeling his way, seeking to find a method of approach suitable to the prejudices and knowledge, in his effort to clinch a final sale" (216). Although these interpretations cover a spectrum of opinions, they all share the inward turn with their focus on the interior workings of the Pardoner. Criticism of the Pardoner and his tale has become predominantly a case study of the Pardoner. It is advantageous to abandon the inward turn as the starting point for reconciling the Pardoner and his tale and adopt a starting point that brings *The Pardoner's Tale* into the context of *The Canterbury Tales* as a whole. The central concern of storytelling in *The Canterbury Tales* is a sensible starting point. From there, the Pardoner and his Tale can be read as Chaucer's exploration of an unreliable narrator.

## II <span class="critic comment">If there is a two, shouldn't there be a one?</span>

Kittredge follows the common line of thought that the tale fits the teller, but takes it a step further with the claim that Chaucer "depicts a character for its own sake" (830). This claim justifies the inward turn, and the Pardoner easily becomes a case study. A couple of problems emerge with this approach. <mark>First</mark><span class="critic comment">If there is a "first" there should at least be a "second," also indicated by the "couple" in the preceding sentence</span>, the inward turn does not work for every tale in *The Canterbury Tales*. Although the tales stand on their own as excellent stories (a testament to Chaucer's skill), they belong to the larger framework of *The Canterbury Tales*. If an interpretative strategy works well for a few tales but not for the others, it is less desirable than <del>a</del><ins>an</ins> interpretative strategy that works well for all tales. Applying the inward turn to *The Man of Law's Tale* or *The Knight's Tale* proves to be a challenge. While these tales certainly fit the tellers<del>, </del><ins>---</ins>by which I mean <ins>that </ins>the tales do not seem unlikely to come from <del>the</del><ins>their</ins> mouths<del> of the tellers</del><del>, </del><ins>---</ins>they would not fare well underneath the pressure of the psychoanalysis that scholars apply to *The Pardoner's Tale*. The failure of the inward turn as an interpretative strategy for all tales <del>gestures</del><ins>points</ins> <del>towards</del><ins>toward</ins> a more general problem: the lack of evidence that Chaucer's primary goal is to depict "a character for its own sake." If this were his primary goal, he could have ended *The Canterbury Tales* with *The General Prologue,* or perhaps dedicated the rest of *The Canterbury Tales* to stories about the characters or conversations between the characters. Both of these strategies strike me as more fruitful methods to depict "a character for its own sake." But Chaucer does not choose either of these strategies. Instead, he has his characters from *The General Prologue* tell stories to each other.<span class="critic comment">Strong points.  If find this paragraph convincing.</span>

If *The Canterbury Tales* is not primarily a conglomeration of good stories or portraits of characters, then what is it? Chaucer answers this question through Harry Bailly at the end of *The General Prologue*:

> This is the poynt, to speken short and pleyne,\
> That ech of yow to shorte with oure weye\
> In this viage shal telle tales tweye\
> To Caunterburyward, I mene it so,\
> And homward he shal tellen othere two. (790-794)

Harry Bailly proposes a storytelling contest, and Chaucer devotes the remainder of <del>*The Canterbury Tales the*</del><ins>*The Canterbury Tales* to the</ins> contest. In a way, *The General Prologue* behaves like a textbook introductory paragraph. Chaucer begins broadly and ends narrowly. He sets the stage with a description of April and the context of a pilgrimage. He then details the characters with his descriptions of each of them. Finally, he begins the action with Harry Bailly's proposed storytelling contest, which resembles a thesis statement for *The Canterbury Tales*. Thus, storytelling takes center stage at the end of *The General Prologue*.

A distinction needs to be drawn between a story and storytelling. Whereas a story is a report or a narrative of events, storytelling is the reporting of <ins>the </ins>events. Whereas a story is static, storytelling is dynamic. *The Canterbury Tales* taken as a whole shows <mark>more concern for storytelling than stories</mark><span class="critic comment">This might be overstated.  I think you just need the idea that Chaucer shows *a* concern for storytelling, not that his concern for storytelling eclipses or is *more* than his concern for stories.  Afterall, a concern of *stories* is certainly *very* important in the *Canterbury Tales*</span>, and over the course of the pilgrimage, the dynamic nature of storytelling unfolds. A pilgrim introduce their story. The other pilgrims respond---sometimes with stories of their own. The dynamic of storytelling creates the central action, and <mark>through Chaucer foregrounds the issues of storytelling as a central concern in *The Canterbury Tales*.</mark><span class="critic comment">Something is wrong here; this clause is grammatically off and every way I try to fix it, it just ends up being repetitive.  Try simply deleting it.</span>

<mark>Because storytelling is a form of rhetoric, I will appeal to Aristotle's *Rhetoric* in order to outline the major issues of storytelling.</mark><span class="critic comment">This is a super weak sentence as well as a weak reason.  Just because X is a form of rhetoric does not mean that appealing to Aristotle will be helpful at all.  The citation of Aristotle within Chaucer is a *much* stronger reason, so just skip straight to that.</span> Although Aristotle is not the inventor of rhetoric, he is the first to conduct a detailed study of rhetoric, one which has had a long-lasting influence in Western thought.[^1] His prominent influence in Chaucer's time is evidenced by Chaucer's Clerk:

> For hym was levere have at his beddes heed\
> Twenty bookes clad in blak or reed\
> Of Aristotle and philosophie\
> Than robes riche or fithele or gay sautrie.\
> (The General Prologue 292-295)

Although this passage speaks more directly to the character of the Clerk, it also shows the importance of Aristotle in the Medieval mind. <mark>Because of Aristotle's preeminence in the study of rhetoric and his prominence in Chaucer's time and writings, his treatise on rhetoric is a sensible point to begin to understand the issues of storytelling that Chaucer explores.</mark><span class="critic comment">Start with this sentence at the beginning of the paragraph.</span>

Aristotle's three modes of persuasion <del>carry weight</del><ins>turn up</ins> in *The Canterbury Tales*. In his *Rhetoric*, Aristotle suggests that persuasion is achieved through the "personal character of the speaker" (*ethos*), the audience's "frame of mind" (*pathos*), and the "proof, or apparent proof, provided by the words of the speech itself" (*logos*) (24-25). He explains:

> Persuasion is achieved by the speaker's personal character when
> the speech is so spoken as to make us think him
> credible....Secondly, persuasion may come through the hearers,
> when the speech stirs their emotions....Thirdly, persuasion is
> effected through the speech itself when we have proved a truth or
> an apparent truth by means of the persuasive arguments suitable
> to the case in question. (25)

<del>And so, </del><del>a</del><ins>A</ins> skilled rhetorician<ins>, therefore,</ins> shows himself to be credible, stirs up the audience's emotions, and gives persuasive arguments.

When Harry Bailly proposes the storytelling contest, he implicitly begins an investigation of the three modes of persuasion:

> And which of yow that bereth hym best of alle,\
> That is to seyne, that telleth in this caas\
> Tales of best sentence and moost solaas,\
> Shal have a soper at oure aller cost.\
> (796-799)

In his proposition, all three modes of persuasion are present. Harry Bailly evokes <del>e*thos*</del><ins>*ethos*</ins> when he begins, "And which of yow that bereth hym best of alle," by which he must mean which teller shows himself most credible. As he clarifies this, he appeals to *logos*: "That is to seyne that telleth in this caas / Tales of best sentence." And finally, he invokes *pathos* by <del>elucidating</del><ins>explaining</ins> that the tale should be not only of "best sentence" but also of "moost solaas." In other words, the tale must be moving. Harry Bailly's requirements for the best storyteller correspond to Aristotle's requirements for a skilled rhetorician. But that he mentions the modes of persuasion in one breath alludes to an important aspect of them. Although Aristotle presents them as neatly defined pieces, they are actually jumbled together. Harry Bailly highlights the relational nature of *ethos, pathos,* and *logos,* showing that the modes of persuasion set forth by Aristotle can be re-framed as the interwoven relationships of the teller, the audience, and the tale. These relationships make up the issues of storytelling that Chaucer explores.<span class="critic comment">This paragraph strikes me as less persuasive than what I have read so far.  The fact that Bailly is doing something slightly different indicates to me that we are simply wrong to apply Aristotle to this text just as much as it indicates that Bailly is "reframing" Aristotle.  I think your strongest point is that Chaucer is exploring the act of storytelling by exploring the relationships between teller, audience, and tale.  This seems quite distinct from the way that you are applying Aristotelian categories to the rhetorical structure of the tale.  Why not just separate these two points and develop the last two sentences of this paragraph into a full paragraph of its own?</span>

*The Pardoner's Tale* explicitly deals with these <del>issues of storytelling</del><ins>relationships between teller, audience, and tale</ins>. This seems appropriate considering that the Pardoner is, as Khinoy observes, the only professional storyteller on the pilgrimage (258). When Harry Bailly turns to the Pardoner to ask him for a story he says, "Telle us som myrthe or japes right anon" (The Physician's Tale 319). The Pardoner agrees, but the other pilgrims cut him off: "Nay, lat hym tell us of no ribaudye! / Telle us som moral thyng that we may leere / Som wit, and thanne wol we gladly here" (324-326). This exchange foregrounds the relationship between the teller and the audience, which becomes an important issue in *The Pardoner's Tale*. Additionally, it points to the incongruities of the Pardoner. While Harry Bailly requests a ribald tale, the other pilgrims request a moral tale. The contrasting requests hint at some confusion about the teller's capabilities. As a pardoner, he should be well-versed in giving sermons---a skill to which the other pilgrims appeal. But Harry Bailly seems to think that he would be a good candidate for telling a bawdy story. As this opening exchange highlights the general issues of storytelling, a more specific issue appears: the Pardoner as an unreliable narrator.


## III

*The Great Gatsby's* Nick Carraway---with his self-described inclination to "reserve all judgement"---has become the textbook example, championed by high school literature teachers everywhere, of an unreliable narrator (Fitzgerald 1). Wayne C. Booth first coined the term "unreliable narrator" in his book *Rhetoric of Fiction* published in 1961. His invention of the category of the "unreliable narrator" came in the wake of a perceived movement in modernist novels like *The Great Gatsby* away from omniscient narration and "dramatized reliable narrators" (Booth 156). Booth's identification of an unreliable narrator hinges on distance: "For lack of better terms, I have called a narrator *reliable* when he speaks for or acts in accordance with the norms of the work (which is to say, the implied author's norms), *unreliable* when he does not" (159). The "implied author" refers to the author's "second self," which is distinct from both the narrator and the author himself (71). In a sense, the implied author is the concrete version of the author---as perceived by the reader---present in the work. An unreliable narrator, according to Booth, is a narrator who displays a distance between his norms and the norms of the implied author. Booth's definition has become nearly canonical. In *A Dictionary of Narratology*, Gerald Prince defines an unreliable narrator as "a narrator whose norms and behavior are not in accordance with the implied author's norms; a narrator whose values (tastes, judgments, moral sense) diverge from those of the implied author's; a narrator the reliability of whose account is undermined by various features of that account" (101).<del> This definition represents the general consensus concerning the definition of an unreliable narrator.</del>

While Booth's definition of an unreliable narrator became widely accepted, he himself admitted: "our terminology for this kind of distance in narrators is almost hopelessly inadequate" (158). Recently, scholars have questioned Booth's definition. In his article "But why will you say that I am mad? On the Theory, History and Signals of Unreliable Narration in British Fiction," Ansgar Nunning challenges Booth's murky concept of the implied author as he attempts to establish standards that "allow the critic to recognize an unreliable narrator when he or she sees one" (86). Nunning suggests "that the implied author's norms are impossible to establish and that the concept of the implied author is eminently dispensable. The implied author is neither a necessary nor a sufficient standard for determining a narrator's putative unreliability." Given the murky definition of the <del>"</del>implied author<del>"</del> and the difficulty of arriving at the norms of the implied author, it seems sensible to dispense <del>of</del><ins>with</ins> it as part of the definition of an unreliable narrator.

But dispensing <del>of</del><ins>with</ins> the implied author leaves a gap in its definition that forces the question: unreliable compared to what? Earlier, I developed the notion of storytelling as a dynamic between the teller, the audience, and the tale from Aristotle's three modes of persuasion (*ethos, pathos*, and *logos*). This notion proves helpful in filling in the gap Nunning's criticism <del>left</del><ins>leaves</ins> in Booth's definition of the unreliable narrator. An unreliable narrator <del>can be defined as</del><ins>is</ins> a narrator with a <mark>discrepancy</mark> in *ethos* or *logos* or both<span class="critic comment">discrepancies must be between X and Y.  So you still need to say "a discrepancy between the narrator and..." Perhaps you mean to say "shortcoming in *ethos* or *logos* or both."  Or perhaps you mean to say "a discrepancy between the narrator's *ethos*, *logos*, or both and ideal *ethos*, *logos*, or both.  Further, you probably want to say that it is a "marked" or "explicit" discrepancy, because by these definitions *every* narrator will count as "unreliable" because *every* narrator falls short of ideal rhetoric in *some* way.  What you probably have in mind is that some texts explicitly call attention to this shortcoming.</span>. This definition provides a few advantages. First, it replaces the murky figure of the implied author with the clearcut figure of the narrator<span class="critic comment">No.  The narrator is present in both definitions.  You are replacing the implied author with an ideal standard (or something like that) or simply deleting him from the definition.</span>. Second, it replaces the standard of the implied author's norms with the standard of credibility and good proof <mark>as perceived by the audience </mark><span class="critic comment">Do you really mean this?  If the standard is "as perceived by the audience," then a narrator might be unreliable to you that is not unreliable to me.  What if I identify with Nick's way of looking at the world and talking about it?  Does he become reliable for me?  If I was correct in my earlier comment, what you probably mean is "standard...as established by the text itself."  What's notable about *Gatsby* is that *inside* the text there are clues that Nick's account is not very good.</span>. Third, it recognizes the relational dynamic of storytelling. Certain expectations exist for a narrator, namely credibility and good proof. Significantly, each of these expectations demand a judge. The role of judge naturally falls into the hands of the audience<span class="critic comment">Or the text itself</span>, who <mark>of course</mark><span class="critic comment">Whenever you feel the need to say "of course" this probably marks a spot in your thinking where you are going to quickly; Whatever is "of course" to you may not be "of course" to anyone else.</span> recognize credibility and good proof. Kathleen Wall observes: "In the practice of reading, after all, we consider every narrator innocent until proven guilty" (20). The audience collects evidence of the narrator's credibility and good proof---evidence that always appears in the form of <mark>self-revelation</mark> from the narrator. Therefore, a narrator can be considered unreliable when the audience perceives the narrator's <mark>self-revealed</mark> discrepancy in *ethos* or *logos* or both.<span class="critic comment">The fact that it is *self* revelation is just what I'm driving at.  We don't consider a narrator unreliable just because I as a reader happen to be racist, say, and the narrator black.  The narrator becomes unreliable when *he reveals himself* to be so.</span>

## IV

When **Kittredge** identifies "the confession of the Pardoner" as a problem in *The Pardoner's Tale*, he spotlights the moments in which the Pardoner reveals his discrepancies (1). In the prologue to his tale, the Pardoner blatantly confesses: "For myn entente is nat but for to wynne / And nothyng for correccioun of synne" (403--404). The Pardoner tells the other pilgrims outright that his motive for preaching is to make money not to correct sin. Although his theme is always "*Radix malorum est cupiditas* "<del>---the root of evil is greed (334)</del><ins> (the root of evil is greed; 334)</ins>, he makes it clear that he intends to set people free from greed so that they will freely give him their money: "Of avarice and of swich cursednesse / Ys al my prechyng for to make hem free / To yeven hir pens---and namely unto me" (400-402). The Pardoner's language winks at the pilgrims. He shows himself clever, but undermines his credibility. Moreover, he confesses brazenly, which draws into question the likelihood that such an admission could be <del>realistically made</del><ins>made realistically</ins>. Kittredge solves this difficulty by suggesting that the situation excuses Chaucer from a crime against believability: "The circumstances are not ordinary. He is not on his rounds. The pilgrims are a company associated by chance, and likely never to assemble again after their return supper at Harry Bailly's" (830). Chaucer sets up the perfect circumstances for the Pardoner to reveal his motive for preaching. The Pardoner also feels free to confess that his relics are fake: "Thanne shewe I forth my longe cristal stones, / Ycrammed ful of cloutes and of bones. / Relikes been they, as wenen they echoon" (347--349). Essentially, the Pardoner confesses to being a swindler. He knows that the relics are fake, but he tells people that they are real. The Pardoner appears to be a money-grubber and a swindler, both of which would obviously compromise his credibility to tell a moral tale---especially one with the theme "*radix malorum est cupiditas*."<span class="critic comment">Strong paragraph.</span>

But understanding the Pardoner as a clearcut money-grubber and swindler requires a cavalier reading of *The Pardoner's Tale.* In the epilogue, the Pardoner makes a statement that brings some confusion:

> And lo, sires, thus I preche,\
> And Jesu Crist that is oure soules leche\
> So graunte yow his pardoun to receyve.\
> For that is best. I wol yow nat deceyve.\
> (915--918)

After an impudent confession of his mercenary motives for preaching, the Pardoner insists that Jesus Christ's pardon is best. He then makes a sales-pitch for his relics---"I have relikes and pardoun in my male"---a choice that complicates his earlier admission that the relics are false (920). Critics have sought to resolve the apparent conflict in *The Pardoner's Tale*. Kittredge reads this moment as one in which the Pardoner finds himself in a "moral convulsion." Evanoff reads it as one in which the Pardoner is "seeking to find a method of approach suitable to the prejudices and knowledge, in his effort to clinch a final sale." In Kittredge's reading, the sales-pitch becomes the Pardoner recovering from his convulsion; and in Evanoff's reading, the sales-pitch aligns with the Pardoner as a thoroughgoing cheat. Abandoning the inward turn on which both of these interpretations rely allows the conflict to disappear as a problem. Instead, the conflict gestures towards an aspect of the Pardoner's character that Chaucer observes in *The General Prologue*: "I trowe he were a geldyng or a mare" (691). Much has been said of this line in regards to the Pardoner's sexuality. <mark>Conjectures about sexuality aside</mark><span class="critic comment">If it were me, I wouldn't bring up sexuality just to set it aside.  Either talk about it, or don't bring it up at all.  You could just as easily say, "whatever else this line means, it certainly indicates a general confusion surrounding the Pardoner."</span>, it certainly does reveal a general confusion surrounding the Pardoner. Chaucer does not know whether he is a gelding or a mare. Similarly, the pilgrims do not know whether the Pardoner loves money only or believes that Jesus Christ's pardon is the best; they do not know why he might admit to selling fake relics and then make a sales-pitch. Despite the urge to reconcile the Pardoner's incongruities, the confusion should not be resolved. In fact, it provides the key to understanding the Pardoner as a narrator---his discrepancies. The confusion surrounding the Pardoner undermines his credibility, making him an unreliable narrator.

Given the dynamic relationships between teller, audience, and tale, the Pardoner's unreliability has consequences beyond his own *ethos*. As Stevens and Falvey observe, "We cannot read the *Pardoner's Tale* without raising questions about the poet/narrator's integrity and what its presence or absence may mean to the overall effect that a work of literature will have. Clearly, for Chaucer the story or poem cannot have an existence independent of its teller" (156). The Pardoner's unreliability ultimately undermines the effect of his tale. Kittredge called *The Pardoner's Tale* "perhaps the best short narrative poem in the language" (830). While that is a bold claim, it is not an unreasonable one. The tale holds together well. The Pardoner begins by condemning the three tavern sins---gluttony, drunkenness, and swearing. He then supports his theme, "*radix malorum est cupiditas*," with an <mark>exemplum</mark><span class="critic comment">Do you really need a Latin word here? Or would "example" do?</span> that concludes with the three protagonists killing one another over a pile of florins. He finishes his tale with a call to repentance: "Now goode men, God foryeve yow youre trespas / And ware yow fro the synne of avarice!" (904--905). Truly, he tells a tale "of best sentence." But his tale fails to bring about both the effect he intends to bring about and the effect it ought to bring about. After the Pardoner claims that Jesus Christ's pardon is best and makes the sales-pitch, Harry Bailly responds:

> It shal nat be, so thee'ch!\
> Thou wouldest make me kisse thyn olde breech\
> And swere it were a relyk of a seint---\
> Though it were with thy fundement depeint!\
> But by the croys which that Saint Eleyne fond,\
> I wolde I hadde thy coillons in myn hond\
> Instide of relikes or of seintuarie!\
> Lat kutte hem of! I wol with thee hem carie.\
> They shul be shryned in an hogges toord!"\
> (947-955)

Faced with the Pardoner's well-constructed moral tale that warns against greed, Harry Bailly unloads a monstrous insult on the Pardoner, ignoring his tale altogether. Although the Pardoner invites him to do so by singling him out from among the pilgrims---"I rede that oure Hoost heere shal bigynne, / For he is moost envoluped in synne. / Com forth, sire Hoost, and offre first anon, / And thou shalt kisse my relikes everychon"---Harry Bailly reacts to the teller rather than the tale (941-944). Moreover, he responds with a hailstorm of insults befitting a ribald tale instead of with a confession or with money. Certainly, the Pardoner did not want the reaction he receives: "This Pardoner answerde nat a word. / So wrooth he was, no word ne wolde he seye" (956-957). His discrepancy in *ethos* ruins the effect of *logos* and poisons *pathos*.


## V

Ultimately, Chaucer's exploration of unreliable narration exposes an anxiety regarding epistemology and storytelling. Nunning observes that unreliable narration is uncommon in nineteenth-century British novels: "One might hazard the suggestion that the scarcity of unreliable narrators in the Victorian novel may at least partly be attributed to the fact that the epistemological premises which unreliable narration calls into question were still generally accepted." The epistemological premise which Nunning sees unreliable narration calling into question is "the notion that human beings are principally taken to be capable of providing veracious accounts of events and of others" (92). Nunning confines the query that unreliable narration lays bare to a Modern vision of epistemology<del>---</del><ins>: </ins>empiricism<span class="critic comment">This whole construction is a little awkward; consider revising</span>. A modern novel like *The Great Gatsby* calls into <del>the </del>question the integrity of empiricism. For example, critics often highlight the contrast between Nick Carraway's limited perspective and the symbol of Dr. T.J. Eckleburg's all-seeing eyes.[^2] When Booth introduced the concept of an unreliable narrator, he was responding to the emergence of narrators like Nick Carraway<del>---those who fail to recount events veraciously because of a discrepancy in *ethos* or *logos* or both</del><span class="critic comment">This is *your* definition not Booths, so Booth could not have introduced this concept so defined.</span>. Despite this, authors wrote unreliable narrators before <del>an empirical epistemology</del><ins>empiricism</ins> became <del>preeminent</del><ins>prominent</ins><span class="critic comment">I'm not sure that empiricism has ever been preeminent</span>. The unreliability of Chaucer's Pardoner calls into question an entirely different epistemology, a Medieval epistemology that champions the revelation of <mark>Truth</mark><span class="critic comment">What is Truth with a capital 'T'?  Is it different from truth?  If so you should explain.</span>. The Pardoner fails to relate Truth because of a discrepancy in <del>*ethos.*</del><ins>*ethos*.</ins> His failure forces the question of whether or not storytelling, given its dynamic relationships between teller, tale, and audience, can do what we ask it to do? Chaucer demonstrates that the Pardoner's unreliability undermines his ability to relate Truth---even through<ins> it is</ins> an explicitly moral<del>,</del> and well-constructed<del>,</del> tale. Harry Bailly's response makes the ineffectiveness of a moral tale from the lips of an unreliable narrator evident, <mark>exposing an anxiety that storytelling involves too many contingencies to ever communicate an absolute truth.</mark><span class="critic comment">I'm not sure this is quite right.  It seem to me to rather reveal an anxiety over whether the bearers of Truth (priests, confessors, religious writers) can be relied upon given sin.  In other words it seems to be an anxiety about the reliability of storytelling under the *specific conditions* of sinful storytellers, rather than a universal worry about storytelling as such.</span>

Perhaps Harry Bailly describes an impossibility when he outlines the winner of his contest as "which of yow that bereth hym best of alle... / Tales of best sentence and moost solaas" (796--798). A perfect unity of *ethos, pathos,* and *logos* seems unlikely. Or perhaps Harry Bailly recognizes this, and the winner of the storytelling contest will not be the one who achieves a perfect unity of *ethos, pathos,* and *logos*, but the one who achieves the *best* unity of *ethos, pathos*, and *logos*. Regardless of Harry Bailly's grasp on the interwoven nature of the issues of storytelling, the Pardoner shows himself to be an unlikely winner of a meal at Harry Bailly's tavern. Although he tells a tale of "best sentence," his self-revealed discrepancies ruin his chances of being among those "that bereth hym best of alle," and the confusion which they cause for his audience erodes his tale as one of "moost solaas."<span class="critic comment">Solid conclusion.</span>

[^1]: *Encyclopaedia Britannica*, 14th ed., s.v. "Rhetoric." Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1965

[^2]: Eble, Kenneth. "The Great Gatsby". *College Literature* 1.1 (1974): 34--47. Web.<span class="critic comment">First, note that you have not been using footnote style citations this whole time.  Pick either parenthetical citations plus works cited or footnote, but keep it consistent.  Second, this is not how you do a footnote style citation.  This style of citation should be reserved for bibliography entries.  Footnote style citations have first name then last name and details separated by commas.</span>
