---
title: A Complex Eternity
tagline: A modest proposal for rethinking the dichotomy between temporalism and atemporalism with respect to God's eternity. Presented to the Society of Christian Philosophers, Georgetown University, April 2013.
author: D.T. Sheffler
date: 2013-04-01
layout: paper
pdf: http://dtsheffler.com/pdfs/A-Complex-Eternity.pdf
---

# A Complex Eternity #

One of the central issues in the philosophy of religion is the
relationship between God and time. In the contemporary discussion,
the issue is framed between the two opposing positions of
eternalism and temporalism. The eternalist claims that God is
altogether timeless while the temporalist claims that God is
somehow "in" time. We may wonder, however, whether these two
positions exhaust the available options. In this essay I hope to
show that God may be similar to temporal entities in some respects
but not in others. The dichotomy between "inside" and "outside" of
time is therefore too simplistic a treatment. I will motivate this
view in three ways. First, I will distinguish between a strong and
a weak sense of "timeless" and show that it is the strong sense
that the eternalist typically needs. On the weak sense, an entity
is timeless iff it is not temporal. On the strong sense, however,
an entity is timeless iff it possesses none of those
characteristics that characterize temporal beings as temporal.
Second, I will show that the motivations which lead away from
eternalism are not identical to the motivations which lead toward
temporalism. One major reason for rejecting strong timelessness is
the rejection of a whole philosophical and theological outlook
driven by a thoroughgoing conception of divine simplicity. Once one
has rejected this picture, however, one is not thereby forced to
adopt a full-blown temporalism. Third, I offer an argument from the
predication of complex actions to God for the view that God's
eternity must be characterized by complexity and something
analogous to our temporal *before* and *after* relations without
thereby being altogether temporal. I offer this conclusion as a
special case of the more general thesis that God is importantly
similar to temporal entities in some respects but not in others.





## Terminology ##

The eternalist--temporalist debate is ill named. From this
terminology one would assume that the debate is between those who
assert that God is eternal and those that assert that he is not.
Most temporalists, however, *do* assert that God is eternal, they
merely wish to dispute what this eternity is like. They maintain
that God is "in time" in some way, but typically go on to qualify
this claim by saying that God is eternal in the sense that he is
without beginning or ending, or that he is not "limited" by the
constraints of time. Thus the debate is between those who hold two
radically different conceptions of eternity: eternity as
timelessness and eternity as everlastingness.[^1] In order to keep
this distinction clear, many have chosen to reserve the word
"eternity" for the former position and to use "sempiternity" or the
like for the later. This, however, seems inadvisable for the
temporalists on rhetorical grounds. The word "eternity" is deeply
rooted in most translations of the scripture, the customary
religious language, and the theological traditions of most
religions---without it being completely clear just what the use of
the word means philosophically. If the so-called eternalists claim
this word as their own, they have nearly won the debate by this
move alone. I propose, therefore, that we define "eternity" as the
mode of God's being and acting whatever this turns out to be. The
debate should then be cast as a debate about the nature of
eternity, not a debate about whether or not God is eternal.

Defining eternity in this way also helps bring to the fore a
further issue which should not be lost in the debate: the positions
of eternity as timelessness and eternity as everlastingness do not
exhaust the logical space of what eternity could be like. There are
two ways that we may understand the term "timeless." In a weaker
sense "timeless" may simply mean "not temporal." In a stronger
sense, however, "timeless" may mean "radically unlike temporal." As
a parallel example, we could wonder about the meaning of the
imaginary term "triangleless." Our ordinary term "triangular"
involves as essential characteristics (a) being planar, (b) being
bounded, and (c) having three straight sides. Now we may ask
whether a square is triangleless. In a weak sense, it would be
triangleless because it lacks one of the essential features of
being triangular, which is just to say that a square is not a
triangle. Given the stronger sense, however, a square is still
somewhat similar to a triangle, sharing characteristics (a) and
(b). In this sense we need something radically unlike a triangle,
e.g. a proposition or the color red, to qualify as triangleless. On
a stronger sense of timeless, therefore, if any feature is
characteristic of temporal beings *qua* temporal then we may safely
infer that nothing like that feature may characterize a timeless
being. This kind of inference is employed frequently in authors
like Augustine and Boethius (to name just a few), but would be
invalid on the weaker understanding. Thus, it is this stronger
sense that eternalists typically want, but this leaves out the
middle position that there are some features of temporal beings
*qua* temporal that are analogous to features of eternal beings
*qua* eternal. I therefore propose a terminology which covers these
three positions:

Atemporalism
:    Eternal entities possess *no* feature similar to any feature
     characteristic of temporal entities.

Semi-Temporalism
:    Eternal entities possess *at least one* feature similar to a
     feature characteristic of temporal entities, but in some important
     respects eternal entities are unlike temporal entities.

Temporalism
:    Eternal entities possess (nearly) *all* of the features
     characteristic of temporal entities.

By a feature which is "characteristic" of temporal entities I mean
a feature that a temporal being possesses *qua* temporal. This is
to rule out the possibility of claiming that both temporal and
eternal entities are similar in virtue of something which has
nothing to do with being temporal or eternal (e.g. the property of
being the subject of predication). This qualification should also
rule out gerrymandered or gruesome properties like being temporal-
or-eternal. I also mean the word "feature" to be understood in a
broad sense so that it includes properties, relations, propositions
concerning, predicates etc. The purpose of this paper is to argue
that semi-temporalism is a viable position that deserves more
attention in the contemporary discussion. I am not at all sure that
semi-temporalism is true, only that it is more plausible than the
attention given to it would seem to indicate.

To illustrate what it would be like for something to share only
some but not all of the features characteristic of temporal
entities we may imagine a science-fiction scenario in which there
are alien life-forms very different from us. What these aliens call
"time" is also very unlike our version. What they call time has a
short cyclical topology such that all events repeat on a five
"second" period. Or rather, I should not say "repeat" or "period"
since each event is numerically identical to the event five
"seconds" in the "future" and in the "past." Further we may imagine
that for these beings nothing ever comes into existence or goes out
of existence so that their lives are without beginning or ending,
yet of finite length. Should we call these aliens temporal or not?
It does not seem to me that this question has a straight-forward
answer. In many ways they lack certain features that we take to be
constitutive of what it means to be temporal, yet in other ways
(e.g. having a successive consciousness) they share important
features with temporal beings such that it does not seem fair to
call them timeless in the way that a proposition is timeless.
Clearly these aliens would satisfy no one's understanding of
eternity, but they do illustrate how it is logically possible, or
at least imaginable, that an entity could posses some but not all
of those features central to being temporal.

As a sampling of the kind of features I have in mind that
characterize temporal entities as temporal I offer the following
three:

**Sequence**
:    If an entity is temporally extended, then there are at least
     two times at which it exists one of which is *before* the
     other and conversely the other is *after* the one.

**Causation**
:    If X causes Y then X cannot be later than Y.

**Beginnings**
:    If an entity is temporal then it must have come to be at some
     time.

Of course all three of these characterizations are disputable, and
I do not here intend to work out a carefully articulated philosophy
time. Nevertheless, *something* in the neighborhood of these three
must be true. To be sure, there are many other important
characteristics of temporal beings, but all I need for my argument
is that there is more than one and that each of the characteristics
does not entail all the others.

[^1]: There is also a breakdown in the temporalist camp between
those who hold that "without beginning" means that God's own
existence antecedent to any act of creation is characterized by a
temporal structure stretching back infinitely into the past, and
those, like William Lane Craig who hold that God is without
beginning in the sense of being the cause of the first moment of
time and only being contingently temporal now. Craig's is an
interesting hybrid view that deserves a careful treatment I cannot
offer here.





## Reject Simplicity not Eternity ##

It is well known that those who are committed to the doctrine of
divine simplicity are also committed to atemoralism because all the
features of time depend in some way on complexity. This can be
demonstrated by way of a straight-forward argument:

a. The divine substance is not composed in any way; nor are there
   entities intrinsic to God distinct from the divine essence.[I
   have pulled this definition directly from @grant12 254]
b. Divine action is intrinsic to God.[^2]
c. Divine action is simple. It is not composed in any way.
d. Temporal acts are essentially complex rather than simple.[^3]
e. Divine action is not temporal.

  [^2]: One may try to escape the conclusion of this argument by
  adopting a model of divine action on which God's actions are
  extrinsic to him. This move, however, seems to jeopardize the the
  immediacy of God--creature interaction even more than divine
  simplicity.

  [^3]: It may be objected to (d) that at least some temporal
  actions are mereologically simple. It seems to me that all
  temporal actions are composed of distinct stages and the stages
  which compose an action are not themselves actions. If we
  "freeze" an action at a single instant we do not have an action
  properly speaking. Nevertheless, supposing that there can be such
  a thing as an instantaneous action, this kind of simplicity will
  not work for divine action, as though God acted once at a single
  instant of time and no others. The non-temporality of God's
  action still follows, therefore, even if we allow for
  instantaneous temporal action.

Because eternity is conceived as the mode of God's being and acting
this line of thought leads to the so-called "static" conception of
both divine action and eternity. There is a single incomposite and
timeless divine act, only the effects of which spread out through
all history. For all the wonder the elegance of this conception
commands, many philosophers and theologians find it both
conceptually mystifying and religiously pernicious. The Christian
faith bears witness to a God who interacts with his creatures in
complex ways, most fundamentally in the incarnation, death, and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, but also in forgiveness, revelation,
answered prayer, judgment, miracles, and the like. As the argument
goes, a robust faith in God must view all such interaction not
merely as the complex effects of a single divine act but as proper
acts of God. Led by this conviction, many reject the traditional
doctrine of divine simplicity and along with it any substantive
distinction between time and eternity. If God's action is not to be
conceived as single and simple, his mode of being and acting should
be conceived as being very much like our own, perhaps with the
qualification that it is quantitatively infinite without beginning
or ending.  This latter rejection, however, need not follow from
the former, and temporalists may be discarding more of the
classical tradition than is necessary in order to satisfy their
central motivations.

Once we reject (c) under the conviction that complexity in God's
action is necessary for him to interact in a meaningful way with
his creatures, the denial of (d) does not follow directly. Just
because God's action is complex and temporal action is complex we
cannot immediately conclude that God's action is temporal. To do so
we would need a modified version of what Stump calls "Hasker's
Principle":[@stump11 [34](sk://stump11#6)]

f. to interact directly with temporal beings requires being
   temporal oneself.

But we should be hesitant before accepting such a categorical
principle. Being temporal involves quite a lot besides complexity.
Perhaps it would be wise to test out the thesis that a complex but
non-temporal being can interact with temporal beings before
concluding that eternity is temporal.

As far as I can tell, there are three prevalent motivations for
adopting temporalism. One is the difficulty of fitting the biblical
witness of a God who forgives and answers prayers into the picture
of a single, partless, divine act. A second motivation is the
conceptual difficulty of understanding how two things of such
ontologically distinct categories as the temporal and the atemporal
can interact with one another at all. We should not conflate these
two. My proposal is that the first motivation is the dominant one
and can be satisfied without adopting a full-blown temporalism. A
third motivation comes from the difficulty of reconciling human
free will with a timeless, omniscient God. My intuition is that if
the atemporalist can successfully deal with the first and second
motivations, they stand a good chance of dealing with this third.
Further, although the temporalist has some quick answers for the
typical questions in this area, temporalism raises difficult
questions of its own. I will, therefore, leave an investigation of
the link between eternity and theological determinism as the topic
for another paper.









## Argument From Forgiveness ##


So far I have attempted to render plausible the claim that eternity
is similar to time in some respects but not in others. I now hope
to offer a positive argument with the conclusion that the eternal
and the temporal are similar in one particular respect: sequential
ordering. The truth of this conclusion implies the falsity of the
doctrine of divine simplicity. In framing this argument, however, I
hope to show that I can say most of what the temporalist wants to
say against the atemporal conception of God's action without
committing to temporalism. To complete this argument I must first
define two terms: 'complex action' and 'stage.' An action is
complex just in case it is essentially characterized by a division
into stages. By 'stage' in this context I just mean a part of an
action rather anything having to do with four dimensionalism. An
interesting and plausible thesis is that *all* temporal actions are
complex, but all I need for my argument is that there is at least
one complex temporal action that finds a relevantly analogous
corollary in God. I will take forgiving as a placeholder for such
an action, but presumably there are many more.

When one person forgives another there is an important sense of
before and after. Suppose that Anna forgives Benjamin for stealing
money from her wallet. For this to be a genuine case of forgiving,
there must be some first stage (s~1~) in which Anna holds this
theft against him. Then, there must be some second stage (s~2~) in
which Anna releases Benjamin from this hold. The structure of
forgiving is more complex than this and likely involves more
essential stages than two, but what matters for our purposes is
that at least two distinct parts of the action can be identified
and that these are essential to its being a case of forgiving. If
there were no initial holding-against---perhaps because Anna was
ignorant of the crime or simply did not care---then she would not
be in a position to forgive, and if there were no second stage,
there would be no forgiveness. In the case of Anna and Bob, it is
likely (and psychologically necessary) that s~1~ and s~2~ occur at
distinct instants or over distinct periods, but it seems at least
imaginable that some being could accomplish both stages of
forgiving in a single instant. What is *not* conceivable is that
s~2~ takes place at a time *before* the time at which s~1~ takes
place.

An important tradition in religious thought maintains that (nearly)
all predication of terms to God must be understood as merely
analogous to the ordinary usage of these terms. On this view, it is
false to say "God forgives" if by "forgives" we mean an action of
exactly the same kind that Anna preforms toward Benjamin. After
all, it is reasonable to suppose that God knows precisely how wrong
Benjamin's action is and also knows that he is always just in his
judgments. Surely such differences are going to make whatever God
does toward Benjamin quite distinct from what Anna does. To stress
this distinction we can term God's version "forgiving~G~," but
before we go too far in this direction we must note that there must
be *some* resemblance between vanilla forgiving and forgiving~G~.
If this were not so, the things we say about God would loose their
grip on any meaningful content. We would have no idea what we were
saying when we claim that God forgives. Surely one respect in which
forgiving~G~ and forgiving are similar is their complexity. If
forgiving~G~ were not divisible into something like Anna's s~1~ and
s~2~ it would be too unlike forgiving to reasonably be called an
analogous predicate.[^simplicityObjection] What remains an open
question at this stage, however, is whether forgiving~G~ needs to
be *temporal* for it to be relevantly analogous to forgiving.

  [^simplicityObjection]: The advocate of divine simplicity will,
  of course, reject this claim, and this is just the point on which
  the debate for and against the doctrine turns. Alternatively, the
  defender of divine simplicity could concede that some of God's
  actions are complex, but hold that they are extrinsic to his
  essence. I do not intend to venture too far into this debate,
  merely to suggest that if one rejects divine simplicity on
  something like these grounds one need not reject a substantive
  notion of eternity with it.


For temporal beings we may safely assume that the stages which
compose their actions must be themselves temporal. Every stage of
Anna's forgiving must *occur* at some instant or period of time.
There is an inheritance of the property *being temporal* that runs
from the agent through the action to the action's parts. Thus the
structure of Anna's action is characterized by (i). There is an
asymmetric relationship between s~1~ and s~2~ such that s~1~ must
occur at some time *before* the time at which s~2~ occurs. Indeed
this is so essentially. If Anna's holding-against came *after* her
release of Benjamin's debt this would not be a case of forgiveness
at all. Further, (ii) and (iii) seem to hold for Anna's action.
There must be some causal chain that runs from s~1~ to s~2~ and her
forgiving must begin at some point. These latter features, however,
do not seem to be features of Anna's action *qua* a case of
forgiving, but rather *qua* a case of temporal action. They may be
essential to forgiving in the sense that they are features of every
case of forgiving in every possible world where forgiving occurs,
but they do not seem to be essential to forgiving in the sense of
being central to our understanding of *what it means to forgive*.

If I am correct that (i) is central to forgiving, then forgiving~G~
cannot do without something analogous to it without the analogy
between forgiving and forgiving~G~ loosing its integrity.
Forgiving~G~ need not, however, be characterized by anything like
the non-central features of (ii) and (iii). But how should we spell
out this "something" which is analogous to (i)? (i) was specified
by explicit reference to individual times, and the *before* and
*after* relations between the stages of Anna's forgiving are only
understood by mapping them onto the *before* and *after* relations
that hold between instants of time. As with other talk about God,
it seems the most advisable way forward is to claim that there is
an analogous rather than identical structure characterizing God's
action. Hence, the stages of God's forgiving may be describe by an
asymetrical, transitive relation *before*~G~ (and its corollary
*after*~G~) such that one part of God's forgiving~G~ is before~G~
another. This relation is merely analogous to the ordinary *before*
relation because we cannot infer from the proposition "one stage of
God's forgiving is before~G~ another stage of his forgiving" such
things as that the first stage *caused* the second stage or that
God's action has a beginning in any sense analogous to the ordinary
sense of "caused" or "beginning."

This may give some sense to such inevitable ways of speaking as
"before God created time...," or "God first...*and then*..." Most
atemporalists will maintain that these are simply mistaken ways of
speaking, but it seems to me that when the layman wonders what God
was like before creation he knows full well that "before" in this
context does not refer to the ordinary relation of before in time,
and is not asking something meaningless or obviously absurd. In
this way there is a certain structural similarity between time and
eternity which is not total. Although there are many ways in which
eternity is very different from time, we should not say with the
atemporalists that it is completely unlike time. This similarity
may also shed some light on how it is that an eternal entity can
interact meaningfully with a temporal one. To fully work this out
is a subject for another paper, but it seems initially plausible
that there is more hope for a semi-temporalist account of time-
eternity interaction than an atemporalist one.



## Conclusion ##

In this essay I have hoped to open up for discussion a third option
in the debate between temporalism and atemporalism and motivate
this middle position in three ways. First, by suggesting a more
helpful terminological scheme we may begin to talk precisely about
what we mean when we claim that God is timeless. Second, I have
cautioned against conflating the motivations which lead away from
atemporalism and the motivations which lead toward temporalism. If
a middle position between the two is tenable, it may be sufficient
to reject atemporalism without bringing on board all the problems
associated with temporalism. Third, a positive argument for this
middle position arises from a consideration of some of God's
actions which are analogous to our own. For this analogy to hold,
God's actions must be characterized by something like our *before*
and *after*, yet the relata of God's version need not be times and
therefore need not be temporal. Eternity must therefore be complex
and structured in a sequential way but need not have all the other
features of time.



