---
title: Why Molinism Does Not Help with the Rollback Argument
tagline: A response to Robert Hartman's proposal that Molinism provides a solution to Peter van Inwagen's Rollback Argument. Presented to the Society of Christian Philosophers, Trinity College, March 2014.
author: Dan Sheffler
date: 2013-04-15
layout: paper
pdf: http://dtsheffler.com/pdfs/Molinism-and-Rollback.pdf
---

# Why Molinism Does Not Help with the Rollback Argument #

Peter Van Inwagen's Rollback Argument presents the libertarian with
a puzzle: the libertarian insists that freedom is incompatible with
determinism, but the Rollback Argument purports to show that
freedom is also incompatible with *in*determinism.[@inwagen00] Van
Inwagen asks us to consider what would happen if God were to roll
the universe back over and over again to a point just before an
agent makes an indeterministic choice. In some repetitions the
agent acts one way, in some another, evoking the sense that what
she does is a matter of mere chance. Last year, at the SCP meeting
in Georgetown, Robert Hartman gave an excellent paper in which he
seeks to show that Molinism provides a solution to Van Inwagen's
puzzle.  He claims that the fixed truth values of Molinism's
"Counterfactuals of Creaturely Freedom" (CCFs) sidestep the central
mechanism of the thought experiment.[^2] I agree with Hartman's
solution to van Inwagen's problem as it stands but I will argue
that he unfortunately pushes the threat of chanciness to elsewhere
in his ontology. To show this, we will need to rework van Inwagen's
original thought experiment into a modal version. Rather than God
rolling the universe back, I describe God picking at random from a
set of possible worlds with identical histories up to the point
when the agent makes her choice. While Hartman can respond to the
original version, he cannot respond in the same way to the new.

I must confess at the outset that I agree with van Inwagen's
assessment: the force of the Rollback Argument does not give us
reason to doubt that we are free. Neither does it give us reason to
suppose that our freedom is, after all, compatible with
determinism. Van Inwagen, Hartman, and I all subscribe to a
libertarian view of free will---making this response something of a
family squabble. All that the thought experiment shows is that
libertarians have some explaining to do. We must give a clear
account of how the indeterminacy of free action is something other
than mere chance. Van Inwagen's original argument and my modal
version of it should both be read, then, as an instrument in the
hand of the libertarian to cut away any component of his theory
that, in the final analysis, understands freedom as luck. I think
Hartman's response helps but ultimately fails, and for this reason
I am still on the hunt for a convincing solution to the problem of
luck.


 
 [^2]: Robert Hartman, "Free Action and Counterfactuals of
 Libertarian Freedom: Why the Rollback Argument (Conditionally)
 Fails" (conference paper, Georgetown University, April 6, 2013).




## Van Inwagen's Version ##



In the Rollback Argument, van Inwagen describes a girl named Alice
who faces a choice either to tell the truth or to lie. Let $L$
refer to the state of affairs in which Alice tells a lie and $T$
refer to the state of affairs in which Alice tells the truth. At
some time $t_1$ Alice is at the point of decision, when either
option is still available. At $t_1$ it is within Alice's power to
bring about $L$ and it is within Alice's power to bring about $T$.
This description appeals to the general Principle of Alternate
Possibilities:

PAP
:    An agent $S$ is free with respect to state of affairs $x$ at
     time $t$ iff at $t$, $S$ is able to bring about $x$ and $S$ is
     able to bring about $\neg{x}$.

Further, the libertarian holds that we must gloss "able to bring
about" in such a way that an agent's being able to bring about $x$
is incompatible with it being physically or nomologically
impossible that he bring about $x$ given the maximal state of
affairs that obtains at $t$. This means that, if Alice is free with
respect to $T$ at $t_1$, there must be nothing about the state of
the universe at $t_1$ that precludes Alice's bringing about $L$. To
say otherwise would be to say that there is something about the
universe at $t_1$ that *makes* Alice tell the truth, but suppose
that as a matter of contingent fact she does bring about $T$ after
$t_1$.



Now, at some later moment $t_2$ God steps in and preforms a little
experiment, reverting the entire universe to its exact state at
$t_1$. $t_1$ is numerically distinct from $t_2$ but the state of
the universe at these two times is qualitatively identical. Now we
can reasonably ask the question, "What will Alice do after $t_2$?
Will she lie or will she tell the truth?" The stakes are exactly
the same, her reasons for taking either course are the same, and
she is still free with respect to both outcomes. If there is
nothing about the state of the universe at $t_1$ that determines
her choice, then there must not be anything about the state of the
universe at $t_2$ that determines her choice either. Let us suppose
that this time she lies. Thus we have a single time line in which
after $t_1$ Alice tells the truth and after $t_2$ Alice lies. Now
suppose that God repeats this procedure over and over again one
thousand times. In some repetitions Alice brings about $T$ and in
some Alice brings about $L$. According to van Inwagen, as the
number of repetitions increases, we are very likely to observe the
ratio between $T$-type repetitions and $L$-type repetitions
converge on some definite proportion. Let us say that after one
thousand repetitions we observe the proportion of $T$-type
repetitions to total repetitions converging on 0.7:1.


Imagining such a scenario we can already sense that this kind of
indeterminism is not what the libertarian wants. The real
difficulty that van Inwagen employs to pump our intuitions is the
question:

> Is it not true that as we watch the number of replays increase,
> we shall become convinced that what will happen in the *next*
> replay is a matter of chance?...If we have watched seven hundred
> and twenty-six replays, we shall be faced with the inescapable
> impression that what happens in the seven-hundred-and-twenty-
> seventh replay will be due simply to chance.
> [@inwagen00 [15](sk://inwagen00#15)]

After we (from a God's-eye perspective) observe Alice going through
her choice over and over again, sometimes lying, sometimes telling
the truth, we get the strong impression that the outcome of the
next repetition will be just as "chancy" as a dice roll. Finally,
van Inwagen concludes,

> Now, obviously, what holds for the seven-hundred-and-twenty-
> seventh replay holds for all of them, including the one that
> wasn't strictly a *re*play, the initial sequence of events.
> [@inwagen00 [15](sk://inwagen00#15)]

But this will not do for a libertarian account of free will. By
claiming that free actions are indeterminate, the libertarian does
not intend to claim that they are metaphysically of the same sort
as decaying Uranium atoms or coin flips. The libertarian therefore
faces two unacceptable options: (i) the outcomes of an agent's
choices are determined beforehand and are therefore not free *or*
(ii) the outcomes of an agent's choices are *not* determined
beforehand, are therefore a matter of mere chance, and are
therefore not free. Determinism or chance: neither is freedom.





## Hartman's Solution ##


Facing this difficult dilemma, the libertarian needs some way of
either ensuring that Alice will choose to tell the truth in each
revision *or* explain how Alice's choice is something more than
mere chance despite its outcome being indeterminate. Hartman is
able to give a plausible account that takes the first of these two
options. To account for God's middle knowledge, Molinism already
posits Counterfactuals of Creaturely Freedom (CCFs). These
counterfactuals take the form:

CCF
:    If an agent $S$ were in circumstance $C$, she would freely
     bring about state of affairs $x$.

Molinism claims that some relevant CCF is true with respect to each
instance of free creaturely agency. In Alice's case, the relevant
CCF would be:

$A$
:    If Alice were in the circumstance that obtains at $t_1$, she
     would freely bring about $T$.

Lest he appear to be a compatibilist, Hartman is quick to point out
that he *does* subscribe to PAP. According to Hartman, there is
nothing about $C$ or $S$ that necessitates that $S$ bring about
$x$. It is simply a contingent truth in the actual world that $S$
would bring about $x$ given circumstance $C$, but there are other
possible worlds in which $S$, in the same circumstances, brings
about $\neg{x}$. Thus, given that $A$ is true, it is simply a fact
about the actual world that under the right circumstances Alice
will tell the truth. Nevertheless, Alice is *able* to lie because
there are other possible worlds in which, facing exactly the same
circumstances, she *does* lie.


This is a neat trick for Hartman because it allows him to get quite
a bit of what the libertarian wants in an account of free will
while also preserving such things as God's exhaustive foreknowledge
and definite truth values for propositions about the future. He can
accomplish the first by insisting that there is nothing about the
universe or the laws of nature that makes $A$ true. There is
nothing even about *God* that makes $A$ true. Both $T$ and $L$ are
therefore metaphysically, nomologically, and theologically possible
for Alice and this seems to be just what the libertarian asserts
when he maintains his allegiance to PAP. In addition, however,
Hartman can account for how it is that God knows what Alice will
do, even though she has multiple routes open to her. Because $A$ is
a *fact* about  the actual world an omniscient God knows it.
Further, because he knows the exact circumstance that obtains at
$t_1$ he knows that Alice will bring about $T$.


This is a doubly neat trick for Hartman because it allows him to
easily solve van Inwagen's conundrum. In any CCF, the variable $C$
ranges over states of affairs rather than times. It does not
matter, therefore, whether $t_1$ is numerically distinct from
$t_2$. *Ex hypothesi*, the state of affairs that obtains at $t_1$
is the same state of affairs that obtains at $t_2$. Alice will
definitely tell the truth after $t_2$ because $A$ is timelessly
true in the actual world. God can revert the universe to its
$t_1$-state as many times as he likes, and Alice will tell the
truth every single time. This escapes the impression that Alice's
action is a matter of chance because she reliably does the same
thing every time. And yet, the Molinist is also able to escape the
charge of determinism because it is nothing about this state of the
universe *alone* that fixes this outcome. The reliability of
Alice's choice derives from the state of the universe *taken
together with* the truth of $A$ and there is nothing that
*determines* $A$ or forces it to be true. $A$ is simply a
contingent fact about our world. If Molinism is true, van Inwagen's
original problem quickly dissolves, and this (*ceteris paribus*)
makes Molinism more attractive.




## Modal Version ##

Unfortunately for Hartman we can rework van Inwagen's original
problem so that the same sense of chanciness reappears. This
modification requires a simple shift from *times* in a single
possible world to different *worlds* that share an identical past.
As will become clear, the force of this problem derives from the
difficulty the Molinist has accounting for the truth-values of his
CCFs.



Consider Alice's situation at $t_1$. An infinite set of logically
possible worlds share the exact history of the world up to and
including this point. Call this set $H$ (for "shared history"), and
let $W$ refer to the actual world. If determinism is false, then
some subset of $H$ larger than {$W$} will be not only *logically*
possible but also metaphysically and nomologically possible. That
is, there must be multiple ways that the world could play out that
are consistent *both* with the history of the world up to and
including $t_1$ *and* the laws of nature. Call this subset
$H'$.[^3] If Alice is free with respect to $T$ and PAP is true,
there must be at least one world, $W'$ that is a member of $H'$ in
which Alice brings about $L$. This characterization seems to be a
fair way of capturing what the libertarian means by the thesis that
freedom is incompatible with determinism. If $H'$ were to include
only worlds in which Alice brings about $T$, then there would be
something about the history of the world taken together with the
laws of nature that precludes her from bringing about $L$. On this
model, we are simply claiming that there are multiple ways in which
the world can legitimately unfold after $t_1$ some of which include
Alice telling the truth and some of which include Alice lying,
putting a possible world's gloss on PAP.

 [^3]: We might also restrict the scope of $H'$ further so that it
 includes, for instance, the will of God or unchangeable features
 of an agent's character in addition to the laws of nature. In
 general, whatever the Libertarian wishes to count as "determining"
 an agent in such a way that it is incompatible with an agent's
 being free should restrict the scope of $H'$. For simplicity,
 however, I will focus on causal determinism, and I do not think
 this affects the argument.
 


Using this framework we can alter van Inwagen's thought experiment
so that God picks a random possible world from $H'$ rather than
reverting the universe within a single world. From the description
of $H'$, we---and Hartman---must say that such a world could be one
in which Alice brings about $T$ or one in which Alice brings about
$L$. Suppose further that God does this over and over again 1,000
times, revealing to us in sequence the history of one world after
another randomly selected from $H'$. We see worlds in which Alice
lies and worlds in which Alice tells the truth. As the number of
worlds increases, the proportion between these two outcomes tends
to converge on some determinate ratio just as it does in van
Inwagen's original case. Here again, the conviction inescapably
arises that what Alice will do in any given world is merely a
matter of chance. As God selects the 1,001^st^ world we could take
bets on whether it is an $L$-type world or a $T$-type world. This
is relevantly similar to the original case because the scope of
$H'$ is restricted precisely by those factors which would count as
violating Alice's free will with respect to her choice. Nothing
about Alice's history, deliberations, or character at $t_1$ could
affect which kind of world God selects because, *ex hypothesi*,
these factors are identical in all members of $H'$. That the actual
world happens to be a $T$-type world---a world in which she does
the right thing---turns out to be quite lucky for Alice.



It is important to see that Hartman's trick does not work a second
time. He cannot appeal to the truth-value of the relevant CCF
because this truth-value varies across worlds. An initial route of
escape may be to insist that $H'$ contains only worlds in which $A$
is true. If he does this, however, Hartman gives up any pretense of
offering an incompatibilist account of free will. When he describes
the nature of CCFs, he insists on inserting "freely" into the
consequent ($S$ would *freely* bring about...). Ostensibly, he is
licensed to do this because---by his own lights---there is nothing
about the universe or the laws of nature that determines the truth
value of a CCF. But these are just the factors that restrict the
scope of $H'$. The Molinist cannot consistently hold (i) that
nothing about the history of the world or the laws of nature
determines the truth value of $A$ and (ii) that $A$ is true in
*all* possible worlds that share their history and the laws of
nature. Assuming that Hartman concedes varying truth-values of $A$
across the worlds in $H'$, he has little left with which to resist
the impression that Alice's choice is a matter of mere chance.



Instead, Hartman may try to restrict the set from which God can
choose to some subset of $H'$. Something like this seems to be
going on in the Molinist account of middle knowledge. After all,
according to Molinism, God's knowledge of which CCFs are true is
logically prior to his decision to actualize this world. All the
worlds that belong to $H'$ where $A$ is false are worlds that God
*could not* create because he knows that $A$ is true antecedent to
his creative act. While these worlds are all logically,
nomologically, and metaphysically possible, they are not
*theologically* possible because God's actualization of any one of
them would violate some creature's freedom. If God is picking,
then, from the pool of worlds that he could create, there will be
no chance that Alice will lie because all of these worlds are
worlds in which $A$ is true.



This response, however, dodges the real source of our sneaking
sense of chanciness, and this source lurks as a consistent problem
for all accounts of Molinism: the grounding of CCFs. The thought
experiment is not meant to reveal anything about the chanciness of
God's creative act. It is meant to reveal something about the
chanciness of Alice's choice. God's creative act does not appear
chancy, but rather *that $A$ should be true*. After all, $A$'s
truth is extraordinarily contingent. Nothing about logic,
mathematics, the laws of nature, the history or initial position of
the universe, the past deeds of Alice, or even her character can
possibly determine the truth value of $A$. No event in Alice's
brain prior to her choice or even anything about the knowledge of
God *makes* it the case that Alice will tell the truth in these
circumstances. Nevertheless, Molinism insists, it is a fact about
the actual world (and any world God could have created) that Alice
*would* tell the truth in these circumstances.



The problem is that Hartman cannot point to anything sensible that
would ground the truth value of $A$ without his Molinism collapsing
into a compatiblist account of free will. Instead (and I think this
is his best move), he may simply describe CCFs as brute facts
within his system. Every comprehensive philosophical account must,
at some point, appeal to brute facts that ground the other truths
in the system. Why should not CCFs play this role? This is a
legitimate move for him to make, but such a move increases rather
than removes our worry about chance. On this version of Molinism,
it is a matter of *sheer* contingency that Alice would tell the
truth in these circumstances. If anything counts as something which
is not "up to Alice" surely it will be matters of sheer contingency
and brute fact. Hartman, therefore, faces a difficult choice: he
may either (i) give a thorough account of what grounds the truth
values of CCFs and, in doing so, risk turning his theory into a
kind of compatibilism or (ii) maintain an incompatibilist account
of free will while conceding that Molinism does not remove the
impression of chanciness in rollback-style thought experiments.




## Conclusion ##

Van Inwagen's thought experiment forces the libertarian to face
this difficulty: actions are either determined or probabilistic and
neither are compatible with freedom. At first glance, it seems that
Hartman's Molinism provides a convenient and clean response to this
problem without adding anything to the theoretical machinery
Molinism already employs in other contexts. If there are true CCFs,
Hartman is able to describe how Alice is both free and yet preforms
the same action each and every time God rolls the universe back.
The main project of this paper has been to show that this response
is too easy. While it does respond to the thought experiment as
given, it does not solve the deeper problem facing libertarian
accounts of free will. Hartman fails to do this because he simply
pushes the area of mystery back from the realm of undetermined
action to the grounding of CCFs. This is an old objection to
Molinism, but I have hoped to show how the grounding problem is
related to the larger problem of luck. Molinism is, therefore, on
level footing with other libertarian theories with respect to the
Rollback Argument.


